 Mahatmaji felt that it was the Government game not to arrest the rank and file of law breakers but to tire them out. He wanted the volunteers not to play into the Governments hands by losing their patience. He wanted them to carry on the work in every branch of national regeneration, namely, production of khaddar and more khaddar to replace foreign cloth. He also wanted the volunteers to engage themselves in an intensive prohibition programme by propaganda, picketing and felling of date trees. It was not necessary that women alone should do all this, especially in the United Provinces and Bihar, where there are very few women. In provinces like Bihar and U.P., Mahatmaji wanted that women should be helped by men. He felt that the initiative in these provinces should be taken by men. Mahatmaji also felt that the people could select other laws also to break wherever they could conveniently do so without prejudice to the salt laws. Mahatmaji also felt that this should be the case particularly in the provinces in which salt could not be produced on an economic basis, or where there were no facilities to manufacture salt. Mahatmaji had in view in this connection, the Chaukidari Tax in Bihar and the Forest Laws in the Central Provinces. Mahatmaji also felt . that Dharasana would supply many volunteers with work, as volunteers from other parts of the country might be required if the Gove rnment were to effect the arrest of the raiders. Mahatmaji saw the possibility of another Gurukabag at Dharasana. He also felt that the stage had come when those who could do constructive work need not court jail. If the present enthusiasm were to be utilized for the lasting good of the country, it must be directed into constructive channels even as the electric current generated by a dynamo. Regarding picketing, Acharya Kripalani said that he had narrated to Mahatmaji his experiences of picketing of shops, which contained both foreign and swadeshi cloth. He explained how some merchants dumped on the market mill cloth as khaddar. In reply, Mahatmaji said that he had expected that picketing would not be quite effective but it was necessary to create an atmosphere for swadeshi, which could suc ceed only by the production of khaddar on a mass scale. Will agents, he said, could help if they co operated with the political workers, and themselves helped in the production of khaddar by refraining from producing cloth below a particular count, which could be left to hand spinning. In this connection, Mahatmaji said he had many talks with Seth Ambalal Sarabhai and Mr. Birla. Mr. Birla had understood his point of view, and had decided to open a khadi organization near his village in Marwar under his own supervision. Seth Ambalal Sarabhai also had very nearly understood his point; but it looked as if other mill owners only wanted to use him (Gandhiji) as their advertising agent. Mahatmaji was apprehensive that unless there was extensive spinning taken on hand at once the swadeshi movement would fail in the absence of production and it would be possible for merchants to cheat the public. When once the public discerned that they were paying higher prices for doubtful stuff, their confidence in the national workers would be so shaken that they would cease to listen to them and even would fight them.


 not say that it is the Mahatma who is behind this resolution. The Working Committee is behind it; so you have to let go the Mahatma. It is far better that you do not vote for the resolution. It should not be that simply because some of us have done something we should be kept on. If we have proved ungrateful or if we have acted foolishly, then certainly remove us from office. And instead of removing us on our return from the Round Table Conference, you can do so now. We are your servants; we shall resign and get away. Even if there is the slightest self respect in us, we shall resign, and you will not be blamed for this. The world will say we did the right thing. But if you feel that because I am a Mahatma this cannot be done, then it is weakness on your part. If swaraj cannot be had without the Mahatma, then, believe me, you will never be able to rule yourselves. When I left for Dandi, I said that even if all the leaders were jailed the fight would not stop. Those outside would continue it. You have shown it in action. Not only all the leaders, but all the workers were jailed, yet our work did not stop. The women took it up and were in turn imprisoned; even then the work did not stop. Was Kikibehn Lalwani, who was dictator of Karachi, fit to be made dictator? The poor lady was suffering from phthisis. But she plunged into the battle, became dictator, and entered jail. The sick woman was cured, and she became a brave fighter. So, you can see that the Mahatma is not indispensable. I may add further that to the extent I deserve the title Mahatma, it was given to me for my spirit of service. Once I give up serving others I shall cease to be Mahatma from that very moment. Therefore do not feel that because this resolution was drawn up by the Mahatma, or by the Working Committee, therefore it cannot be opposed. If after deep consideration you reject this resolution then I shall defend you before the world. But if you accept that you must do exactly as you are told by those who have started the fight, then I tell you to be with me and put up a sincere fight. That is, do not worry if your spokesman returns empty handed. If he brings back something so much the better; but if he does not bring anything we shall fight again. So many have gone to jail, so many have faced lathi charges, and undergone hardships that we do not wish unnecessarily to repeat all this. But, having done our duty, if we do not get what we asked for, then our resolve to fight stands. And, when we are there those who remain


 (b) Mahatmaji is agreeable to the appointment of a commission consisting of representatives of the Congress and the League immediately for the delimitation of the boundaries of the separate sovereign States. (c) Mahatmaji wants that the sovereign States will immediately enter into a treaty for the purpose of (i)safeguarding interests of minorities, (ii) establishing a machinery for the administration of subjects of common concern. But Mahatmaji desires that the wishes of the inhabitants of the areas to be demarcated into sovereign States should be ascertained by a plebiscite. Mahatmaji does not agree with the theory that the Hindus of the whole of India or the Muslims of the whole of India constitute two separate nations. In my (Tarachands) opinion Mahatmaji has substantially accepted the Muslim demand and agreed to the establishment of two sovereign and independent States in India. The differences between Mahatmaji and Mr. Jinnah are: (1) Mahatmaji wants before separation a plebiscite. (2) He does not believe in the theory of religious or communal nationality.


 We have spoken so much today that it would not, I feel, be wrong if in deference to Sarojini Devis advice I hold my tongue. There is, however, one difficulty in doing so. I have left my weapon at home. If I had brought it, I would have given you an object lesson and asked you to take a wheel and start spinning along with me. I had no idea that I would receive this advice today from Sarojini Devi, or that it would be my lot to listen to so much praise. I am tired of listening to praise. Believe me when I say that I do not like this praise. But I shall not say more on this subject just now. I shall only say that I feel bound to those who have praised me and I request them all, as did Shri Jayakar, to help me by their silence. I shall be able to take up heavy responsibilities if I have your silent support. Before I say something, I wish to elicit atonement from one or two persons. Before we attend any meeting, we must learn good manners. We should know and respect the disposition of our guest. If you cannot do this, it is better that you do not attend the meeting. Two or three persons have violated this etiquette of a meeting. What Bhai Jamnadas 2 said was literally true. Much dirty work has been done in the shadow of Mahatma. The word Mahatma stinks in my nostrils; and, in addition to that, when somebody insists that everyone must call me Mahatma I get nausea, I do not wish to live. Had I not known that the more I insist on the word Mahatma, not being used, the more does it come into vogue, I would most certainly have insisted. In the Ashram where I live, every child, brother and sister has orders not to use the word Mahatma. None should refer to me as Mahatma


 Amidst the thundering cries of Mahatma Gandhi ki Jai the train conveying Mahatma Gandhi en route to Calcutta arrived here at exactly 9.25 a.m. Mahatmaji was led to the dais by Sikh volunteers with naked swords in hands. After requesting the audience to remain quiet Mahatmaji delivered a small speech. He said that though he was very glad to see them there, his heart burned within himself to find very few clad in pure khaddar. So long as they did not put on khaddar and all classes of people such as Sikhs, Parsis, Hindus, Mahomedans and others were not firmly united, and so long as the curse of untouchability was not removed, swaraj was impossible. He appealed to the people of Nagpur to bring about real Hindu Muslim unity and take to spinning. After this speech Mahatmaji was presented by the Secretary, City Congress Committee, with the report of the work done in the city. Mahatmaji left Nagpur at about 10. The Bombay Chronicle, 1 5 1925